Wiki reorg: Governance Learn Pages (#4775)
w3f/polkadot-wiki: docs/learn/learn-governance.md

the function call is executed if the vote is approved. Referenda are always binary: your only
options in voting are "aye", "nay", or abstaining entirely.

### Referenda Timeline

The structure of the timeline for all referenda is the same regardless of who initiates the
proposal, although the timeline length can vary (see below).

![gov1-timeline](../assets/gov1-timeline.png)

The figure above provides a summary view of the referenda timeline for Governance V1.

In (1), the proposal is submitted, and the Launch Period starts. During this period of indefinite
length the voters can [endorse](#endorsing-proposals) proposals by bonding the same amount of tokens
used by the depositor. Deposited tokens for endorsement will be returned once the proposal becomes a
referendum. During the launch period, the proposal will compete with other proposals, and the one
that gets to the top will be selected for a referendum when the next voting period starts.

The figure shows that the launch period is shown with a fixed length. Still, it varies depending on
who initiated the proposal and how many proposals there are in the pipeline. Council motions will

> likely have a short launch period overall due to their importance, while some low-priority public

Reviewer: ```suggestion
likely have a short launch period when compared to the public
```

> referenda might take longer unless they are the only ones in the pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
referenda which might take longer unless they are the only ones in the pipeline.
```

In (2), the proposal is selected for a referendum. Proposals initiated by the public will become a
[public referendum](#public-referenda), while those initiated by the council will become
[council referenda](#council-referenda). The voting period lasts
{{ polkadot: 28 days :polkadot }}{{ kusama: 7 days :kusama }}, after which, if the proposal is
approved, it will go through an enactment period. Rejected proposals will need to start from (1).
Note that Governance V1 uses an [alternating voting timeline](#alternating-voting-timetable) where
voters can vote either for a public proposal or a council motion every
{{ polkadot: 28 days :polkadot }}{{ kusama: 7 days :kusama }}.

In (3), the proposal is approved and moves through the [enactment period](#enactment) that can be of
different lengths depending on who initiated the proposal in the first place, with emergency
proposals being the fastest ones and the only ones that can be voted simultaneously with other

> proposals.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
referenda.
```

Majority Council - When agreement from only a simple majority of council members occurs, the
referendum will need [**simple majority**](#adaptive-quorum-biasing) to pass.

> :::info Public vs. Council

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::info Public vs. Council initiated Referenda
```

Public referenda must be agreed upon using a positive bias to mitigate attacks by malicious or
ill-conceived proposals. Conversely, when a proposal is unanimously voted in favor by the council,
it benefits from using the negative bias. We assume low turnout is less problematic if the council

> proposes a referendum. Also, the council members have strong technical knowledge about the system,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
proposes a referendum. Also, the council members are elected by the community and have strong technical as well as functional knowledge about the system,
```

only has a 25% turnout, the tally of _aye_ votes has to reach 34% for it to pass, while if the
turnout increases to 75%, the tally of _aye_ votes has to reach 46%. A negative turnout bias
requires a heavy super-majority of _nay_ votes to reject at low turnouts. However, as turnout
increases towards 100%, it becomes a simple majority carry as below.

![](https://latex.codecogs.com/svg.latex?\large&space;{against&space;\over&space;\sqrt{electorate}}&space;<&space;{approve&space;\over&space;\sqrt{turnout}})

In short, when the turnout rate is low, a super-majority is required to reject the proposal, which
means a lower threshold of _aye_ votes must be reached. As turnout increases toward 100%, it becomes
a simple majority, a simple comparison of votes. If there are more _aye_ votes than _nay_, then the
proposal is carried, no matter how much stake votes on the proposal.

![](https://latex.codecogs.com/svg.latex?\large&space;{approve}&space;>&space;{against})

To know more about where these above formulas come from, please read the
[democracy pallet](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/blob/master/frame/democracy/src/vote_threshold.rs).

> #### Example Adaptive Quorum Biasing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Example of Adaptive Quorum Biasing
```

{{ polkadot: DOT :polkadot }}{{ kusama: KSM :kusama }} than Peter, the lock period for both of them
is less than Peter, leading to their voting power counting as less.

### Delegations

In {{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} you can

> [delegate your vote](../maintain/maintain-guides-democracy.md#delegate-a-vote) to another account

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[delegate your voting power](../maintain/maintain-guides-democracy.md#delegate-a-vote) to another account
```

you trust if you are not willing to stay up-to-date with all referenda.

You can also use a [governance proxy](./learn-proxies.md#governance-proxy) to vote on behalf of your
stash account. The proxy can be yours, or you can authorize a third-party governance proxy to vote

> with your stash. See more about proxies on the [dedicated page](./learn-proxies.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with your stash. Learn more from the [dedicated page on Proxy Accounts](./learn-proxies.md).
```

no member exercising a veto. Vetoes may be exercised only once by a member for any single proposal.
If the proposal is resubmitted after a cool-down period, they may not veto it a second time.

> Council referenda that pass with a 3/5 (60%) super-majority - but without reaching unanimous

Reviewer: Before becoming a referenda, it is called a motion https://polkadot.polkassembly.io/motions

```suggestion
Council motion that pass with a 3/5 (60%) super-majority - but without reaching unanimous
```

support - will move to a public referendum under a neutral, majority-carries voting scheme. In the

> case that all members of the council vote in favor of a motion, the vote is considered unanimous and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
case that all members of the council that voted are in favor of a motion, the vote is considered unanimous and
```
